Getting started
===============



Before getting more into the interface, the quickest way to understand
how sprites are programmed in Scratch is by testing things out. Follow
the steps below when the Scratch program is opened with a clean, new
project.

**1.** Access this area of the Scratch program:

![](GS1.png "GS1.png")

**2.** Select the blue \"[block](Blocks "wikilink")\" called [move ()
steps](Move_()_Steps_(block) "wikilink"), and drag it to the right.

![](Grab_Block.png "Grab_Block.png")

**3.** Release the mouse to place the block; make sure the block is
placed in the darker grey, technically called the [scripts
area](Scripts_Area "wikilink").

![](Place_Block.png "Place_Block.png")

**4.** When done, click anywhere on the block except the white middle,
and watch what happens to the Scratch Cat\... it moves 10 steps!

![](Move.png "Move.png")

**5.** Check out the other block categories and test out what each one
does!

![](Category_Select.png "Category_Select.png")

Blocks
------

As shown above, blocks are the literal building \"blocks\" of a Scratch
project. They have specific commands which function uniquely from one
another. Some blocks can even fit inside *other* blocks, as shown below:
**1.** Assemble the following \"script\", or connection of blocks, by
accessing the various blocks by color and category.

![](Scattered_Blocks.png "Scattered_Blocks.png")

**2.** Assemble the blocks into this formation:

![](Assemble_Blocks.png "Assemble_Blocks.png")

**3.** Grab the blue key sensing block that is still in the void.

![](Grab_2.png "Grab_2.png")

**4.** Place the block into the hexagonal input area in the orange
\"if\" block.

![](Block_Input.png "Block_Input.png")

**5.** Click the [Green Flag](Green_Flag "wikilink") to run the project,
and see what it does!

![](Click_Flag.png "Click_Flag.png")

**6.** Unless you were holding down the space key, nothing should have
happened. Why is that? Take a look at the script again; remember, a
script is a connection or stack of blocks. <scratchblocks> when gf
clicked if \<key \[space v\] pressed?\> then move (10) steps end
</scratchblocks> The script begins with \"when green flag clicked\",
which was done. When the green flag is clicked, it triggers the script
beginning with the \"when green flag clicked\" block to run. When the
script ran, it first detects *if* the space key is down, and *if* it is,
*then* the sprite will move 10 steps. Run the project again while
holding the space key down, and the sprite will move 10 steps!

Paint/Sound Editors
-------------------

Scratch even includes its very own paint editor and sound editor. A
paint editor is a program used for designing and editing images. The
Scratch paint editor can be used to draw the images for sprites (the
characters, buttons, etc.). The sound editor is used for importing,
recording, and modifying sounds used in a project. To access these two
editors, click on the tabs above the blocks palette:

![](Tabs.png "Tabs.png")

Sprites Pane
------------

![The sprites pane of a user\'s project. The currently selected sprite
is highlighted
blue.](Sprites_Pane.png "fig:The sprites pane of a user's project. The currently selected sprite is highlighted blue."){width="252"}
Not all sprites do the same functions in a project, so different sprites
have different appearances, scripts, and sounds stored in their data.
Accessing different sprites can be done in the sprites pane, located
below the stage. The currently selected sprite has a blue box around it
always; by simply clicking on a different sprite, its data can be
accessed. The sprites pane is shown in the image to the right.

Creating New Sprites
--------------------

Most projects on Scratch have indeed more than one sprite. How can new
sprites be created in Scratch? Underneath the Stage is four valuable
buttons for creating a new sprite:

![](New_Sprite_Buttons_2.png "New_Sprite_Buttons_2.png")

With these buttons, a new sprite can be imported as either a plain image
or one that already has scripts. The buttons, going from left to right,
do the following:

-   Opens a pre-built sprite library with many choices
-   Allows one to draw his or her own sprite in the paint editor
-   Opens a file explorer to allow one to upload an image from his or
    her computer
-   Turns on the computer webcam to take an image for a sprite
